Taiko docs (#66)
LimeChain/RollupCodes: src/docs/taiko.mdx

---

> title: Taiko

Reviewer: Imo, we should place  a "info callout" similar to the callout in the precompiles section where we state something of the sorts of:

"The rollup is still in development. Information presented here may change by the time Mainnet is launched."

> subtitle: Taiko is a decentralized ZK-Rollup. The protocol does not have a sequencer allowing anyone to become a proposer in a premissionless manner. Prover markets are implemented allowing anyone to be a prover and earn fees for proving L2 blocks.

Author: 1) do we really want to call the proposers "sequencers", they're not batching blocks together like other rollups but rather proposing a single block. 
2) are you sure we want to omit info about prover markets? They're a feature that is currently only available on Taiko afaik.

labels:
    - ZK-Rollup
    - EVM
    - Testnet
links:
    website:
        url: https://taiko.xyz/
        name: taiko.xyz
    docs:
        url: https://taiko.xyz/docs
        name: Docs
    l2beat:
        url: https://l2beat.com/scaling/projects/taiko
        name: L2Beat
    github:
        url: https://github.com/taikoxyz
        name: Github
    twitter:
        url: https://twitter.com/taikoxyz
        name: taikoxyz
    discord:
        url: https://discord.com/invite/taikoxyz
        name: Discord
---

<Section title="Overview">

    Taiko is a decentralized, Type 1 ZK-Rollup. The protocol does not have a sequencer allowing anyone to become a proposer in a premissionless manner. Prover markets are implemented allowing anyone to be a prover and earn fees for proving L2 blocks.
    
    ###### Focus

    - Full OPCODE EVM equivalence.

    <Labels labels={['ZK-Rollup', 'EVM', 'Testnet']} title="Taiko" />

</Section>

<Section title="General">

    <Parameter name="Block Time" value="On demand*" tooltip="The rate at which the rollup produces blocks. Blocks are produced on demand."/>

>     <Parameter name="Gas Limit" value="8.18 million" tooltip="The gas limit that can be consumed by an L2 block. 180 000 gas is reserved for the anchor transaction."/>

Reviewer: From their docs it says that the gas limit is 6m, we will need to reconcile it.

https://taiko.xyz/docs/reference/differences-from-ethereum

Author: yes, however that's for testnet 3 and 4. We are at testnet 5 already (Jolnir). Reference from block explorer: https://explorer.jolnir.taiko.xyz/block/841551

    <Parameter name="Finality" value="90 minutes" tooltip="The maximum time it takes for an L2 transaction to be considered final after it is sequenced on L1" />

    <Parameter name="Rollup’s State Contract on L1" value={<Reference label="0x95fF8D3CE9dcB7455BEB7845143bEA84Fe5C4F6f" url="https://sepolia.etherscan.io/address/0x95fF8D3CE9dcB7455BEB7845143bEA84Fe5C4F6f" />} tooltip="The contract used for sequencing, proving and storing the state of the L2 network" />

    <Parameter name="State Trie" value="Merkle Patricia Trie + Keccak Hashing" tooltip="The data structure used to represent the state of the Rollup along with the hashing algorithm used to compute the root of the trie" />

    <Parameter name="Execution Node Implementations" value={<Reference label="taiko-geth" url="https://github.com/taikoxyz/taiko-geth" />} tooltip="The different execution-client implementations of the rollup" />
    

>     <Parameter name="Proposer and Prover Implementations" value={<Reference label="taiko-client" url="https://github.com/taikoxyz/taiko-client" />} tooltip="The different client implementations of the rollup" />

Reviewer: Not sure that the `taiko-client` is a prover as-well. Maybe there is a 3rd software for the prover?

Author: Taiko client is a docker compose simplifying running all of the components: https://taiko.xyz/docs/guides/enable-a-prover

>     <Parameter name="Transaction Types" tooltip="The types of transactions supported on the Rollup" />

Reviewer: What is the type of the anchor transaction? We would need to include her here as-well and describe what it does

Author: It's not a separate transaction type. It's simply a method on their system L2 contract implemented in solidity

        - **Type 0** - User Transaction. Represent [pre-EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718) transactions
        - **Type 1** - User Transaction. Represent legacy transactions post [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718) transactions
        - **Type 2** - User Transaction. [EIP-1559](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1559) transactions
    ___

    <MultiRowParameters title="Messaging" tooltip="The Rollup provides native communication with L1. Anyone is able to transmit arbitrary messages and the Taiko protocol will provide proof of the data transfer on the destination chain" data={[
        {
            title: 'L1 → L2',
            rows: [
                {
                    label: 'Latency',
                    tooltip: 'The maximum time it takes for a message to be made available on the rollup after it is included in the Ethereum block.',

>                     value: '90 minutes',

Reviewer: Does the rollup really wait for 90 minutes before they import messages? 🤔

Author: That's the maximum time constrained by the protocol. Average time is usually <10 minutes, however that is the max so i decided to modify the tooltip instead of giving an estimate that may be wrong in the future

                },
                {
                    label: 'Cost',
                    tooltip: 'The gas cost of purely sending a message from Ethereum to Тaiko. In case of automaitic claiming on L2 Senders on L1 pay an additional ETH fee determined by market conditions on Taiko.',
                    value: '~110 000 L1 gas + ~440 000 L2 gas (in case of manual delivery)',
                },
                {
                    label: 'Delivery method',

>                     tooltip: 'How the message on the target chain is delivered. In both automatic and manual delivery, users are waiting for a prover to generate validity proof for the target chain (max 90 minutes). In case of manual delivery users need to claim the message themselves as opposed to automatic',

Reviewer: I think that this tooltip is not correct as it says that users are waiting for a prover to generate validity proof

Author: They are waiting for their message to be made available which is only after the prover submits proof for the block containing their transaction (message). So in a sense the end user is waiting for the prover, no?

                    value: 'Both manual and automatic delivery are supported'
                },
            ],
        },
        {
            title: 'L2 → L1',
            rows: [
                {
                    label: 'Latency',

>                     tooltip: 'The maximum time it takes for a message to be made available on Ethereum after being included in an Taiko block and proved for L1.',

Reviewer: "and proved for L1" sounds strange. What do you mean by that?

Author: After a prover generated proof for the block. I may need to rephrase the whole sentence for clarity

                    value: '90 minutes',
                },
                {
                    label: 'Cost',

>                     tooltip: 'The gas cost of purely sending a message from Taiko to Ethereum. In case of automaitic claiming on L1 Senders on L2 pay an additional ETH fee determined by market conditions on Ethereum.',

Reviewer: Is there automatic delivery for L2 to L1 communication? 
Does it really cost 440k gas for purely receiving the message? Sounds a bit too much, maybe you've looked at a big message with lots of calldata?

Author: It's 440k for merkle inclusion proof of the message

                    value: '~129 000 L2 gas + ~440 000 L1 gas(in case of manual delivery)',
                },
                {
                    label: 'Delivery method',
                    tooltip: 'How the message on the target chain is delivered. In both automatic and manual delivery, users are waiting for a prover to generate validity proof for the target chain (max 90 minutes). In case of manual delivery users need to claim the message themselves as opposed to automatic',
                    value: 'Both manual and automatic delivery are supported'
                },
            ],
        },
    ]} />

</Section>

<Section title="OPCODEs">

    <Legend />

    | Opcode | Name | Solidity Equivalent | Rollup Behaviour | Ethereum L1 Behaviour |
    | :----- | :--- | :-------------------| :--------------- | :-------------------- |
    | 42 | TIMESTAMP | `block.timestamp` | Timestamp of the L2 block | Timestamp of the L1 block <Modified /> |
    | 43 | NUMBER | `block.number` | L2 block number | Gets the L1 block number <Modified /> |
    | 48 | BASEFEE | `block.basefee` | Returns `1` (wei) | Returns the base fee <Modified />  |

>     All other OPCODEs defined in the canonical Ethereum L1 implementation have the same behaviour on the rollup, however the execution of those OPCODEs by the circuits is not 100% EVM equivalent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    All other OPCODEs defined in the canonical Ethereum L1 implementation have the same behaviour on the rollup, however, the execution of some OPCODEs is not verified by the circuits and its not part of the validity proofs.
```

</Section>

<Section title="Precompiled Contracts">

    > ⚠️ All Precompiled Contacts defined in the canonical Ethereum L1 implementation have the same behaviour on the rollup, however, the execution of those Precompiles is currently not covered by the circuits and therefore not present in the Validity proof

</Section>

<Section title="System Contracts">

    The Rollup has introduced the following system contracts.

    | Address | Name | Description |
    | :--- | :--- | :--- |
    | <Copy value="0x95fF8D3CE9dcB7455BEB7845143bEA84Fe5C4F6f" label="0x95f..6f" /> | <Reference label="TaikoL1" url="https://github.com/taikoxyz/taiko-mono/blob/main/packages/protocol/contracts/L1/TaikoL1.sol" /> | Used for proposing, proving and verifying L2 blocks on L1. |

>     | <Copy value="0x1000777700000000000000000000000000000001" label="0x10007777..01" /> | <Reference label="TaikoL2" url="https://github.com/taikoxyz/taiko-mono/blob/main/packages/protocol/contracts/L2/TaikoL2.sol" /> | Used to create anchor transaction for block proving on L2. |

Reviewer: What does it mean "for block proving"? Maybe we have to be more descriptive
